










































For Brexit and Beyond





For Brexit and Beyond

1

Introduction

UKIP is the party of Brexit and beyond.

We have fought to leave the European Union for 27 years, and we continue to insist that the UK has a 
clean-break exit from the European Union. 

The treaty agreed between Boris and the EU will keep us shackled to Brussels. If Parliament ratifies it, we 
will wake up on 1st February having left the EU Commission and Parliament but still locked inside the Single 
Market, Customs Union, European Court of Justice, Common Agricultural Policy, Common Fisheries Policy, 
European Defence Agency, Common Security and Defence Policy, Common Foreign and Security Policy and 
all of its other institutions and systems, while becoming liable to pay the EU a £39,000,000,000 bill.

That is not leaving the EU. We must take back full and immediate control of our sovereignty, laws, money, 
borders, trade and fishing waters on 31st January 2020 – no more delays! 

UKIP also has a domestic agenda, which is of vital importance to the future. We are proud to have 
developed a full common-sense manifesto which combines our founding libertarian principles with 
populism and authentic conservatism.  In particular, we stand for free speech, free markets, financial 
responsibility and traditional British values.

UKIP is the only party that will cut net immigration to below 10,000 net per annum and protect the 
countryside from rampant ‘development’. We will work to uphold freedom of expression and end the 
suffocating culture of political correctness, while supporting a vibrant low-tax economy where businesses 
can thrive and take advantage of the great opportunities our nation will have after we leave the EU.

In this election, we will give the public a choice to vote for a party that will restore common sense politics 
to the UK while working to ensure that we leave the EU without being shackled by a Brexit-In-Name-Only 
treaty. 

Our politicians must honour the wishes of the 17.4 million people who voted to LEAVE!

This Manifesto tells the truth about what UKIP stands for. 

My thanks to all who helped to formulate this policy document.   

Particular thanks and appreciation to David Kurten (London Assembly Member) and Freddy Vachha  
(UKIP London Regional Chairman and National Campaign Manager) for their hugely valid input.

Patricia Mountain
UKIP Interim Leader                   

This cover has been designed using resources from Freepik.com



For Brexit and Beyond

2

Contents

Section No.  Topic 
 
1  Brexit 
2  Health and the NHS
3  Social Care
4  Pensions
5  Work and Welfare 
6  Immigration 
7  Housing 
8  Education
9  Transport 
10  Foreign Affairs and Overseas Aid 
11  Defence and Security 
12  Veterans’ Issues 
13  Police and Criminal Justice 
14  The Prison Service 
15  Agriculture 
16  Fisheries 
17  Economy
18  Digital Economy
19  Small Business
20  International Trade
21  Energy 
22  Environment 
23  Taxation 
24  Children and Families 
25  Animal Welfare 
26  Equality and Disability 
27  Constitutional and Political Reform 
28  Devolution 
29  Local Government
30  Free Speech and Political Correctness 
31  Civil Service Reform
32  Culture and Media
33  Science
34  Cost Savings 
35  Budget Plan
36  References



For Brexit and Beyond

3

1. Brexit

UKIP stands for a complete and total withdrawal from the European Union. Irrespective of whatever 
new ‘withdrawal agreement’ or treaty the government agrees with the EU, UKIP will continue to fight for 
the UK’s total independence from the EU, and to fully restore the UK’s former status as an independent, 
self-governing, sovereign state. 

In short, UKIP stands for: no more money to be paid to the EU, no more EU laws imposed upon us, no 
more jurisdiction over us by the European Court and no more open-border EU immigration. 

• Brexit should mean that the UK not only leaves the EU Commission and Parliament but also that 
the whole United Kingdom leaves the Single Market and Customs Union. There must be no regulatory or 
customs border down the Irish Sea, which separates Northern Ireland from Great Britain.

• Brexit means that the UK leaves the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) and Common Fisheries Policy 
(CFP) and takes full and exclusive control of our rightful maritime territory, the 200-mile Exclusive Economic 
Zone.

• A clean exit from the EU will include withdrawing post-Brexit from the EU Common Foreign, Security 
and Defence Policies (CFSP and CSDP) which will subjugate our armed forces to the EU military command 
and control architecture. We must not be subject to European Defence Funding (EDF), European Defence 
Agency (EDA), or Permanent Structured Cooperation (PESCO).

• We will seek a Free Trade Agreement with the EU, where the UK and EU trade tariff-free in goods 
and services while maintaining regulatory independence. If the EU is not willing to agree such a 
mutually-beneficial arrangement, we will trade with the EU on WTO terms in the same way as we currently 
trade with the USA or Australia.

• Britain’s international standing will be enhanced by leaving the EU as it will be able to act 
independently, whilst retaining its membership of the UN Security Council, the World Trade Organisation, 
the Five Eyes intelligence alliance, and over 100 other international organisations of which we are a 
member. 

• Outside the European Union, Britain will be a more prosperous nation. We will regain control of 
our trade policy, free business from unnecessary regulation, take control of our agricultural industry and 
restore our fishing industry. Increased prosperity will mean more jobs and more tax revenue to pay for 
the things we all want for the British people. 



For Brexit and Beyond

4

2. Health and the NHS

UKIP will ensure that the NHS continues to be free at the point of delivery. 

The NHS is in crisis, not just from a lack of adequate funding but because of the inefficient use of funds and 
ever-increasing demand from the ageing population and foreign nationals. 

The current Provider funding mechanisms need to be overhauled.  

• The internal market (Purchaser / Provider model) should be abolished with the commissioning arm 
working more closely with Providers - reducing bureaucracy and management costs. There should be a 
much more integrated approach to service delivery across Primary and Secondary Care.  Some Trusts are 
already moving in this direction, but integration needs to hasten and include social care in order to improve 
patient pathways.

• Capital funding needs to be vastly increased and made more easily available to Trusts needing to 
replace major pieces of equipment or expand services.  So often, the lack of capital funding leads to leasing 
and other expensive revenue alternatives like PFI.  This must cease as it is poor value for taxpayers’ money. 

• The Private Finance Initiative (PFI) scandal (introduced by the Tories and expanded by Labour), is 
still draining much-needed funds out of our NHS.  PFI contracts financed £11.8 billion to build hospitals in 
England but will cost £71 billion to pay back over 31 years. UKIP will renegotiate or terminate these con-
tracts where possible. 

• Open borders have had a major impact on existing NHS resources by increasing the population by a 
net 4.7 million people since 2000. (1) Most of these people will have no history of contributing significant 
tax revenue to help pay for the NHS but have the same entitlement as British citizens. When Britain leaves 
the EU, this entitlement must not be extended to any new arrivals from the EU (unless reciprocal agree-
ments are negotiated with individual nations).

• The NHS is a national health service and not an international health service. The NHS is open to 
widespread abuse by non-UK citizens. We will end ‘health tourism’ by foreign nationals. Any new arrivals/
migrants into the UK will be required to have private health insurance until they have paid NI for five years.  
Visitors to the UK will also be required to have private health insurance as part of the visa process unless 
specific reciprocal agreements are in place.

• UKIP will dramatically increase the number of training places for British doctors, nurses and par-
amedics. We will prioritise training our own NHS workers, rather than relying on recruiting medical staff 
from abroad or paying extortionate agency costs.  We need at least 40,000 extra nurses and 30,000 doctors.

• We will encourage the recruitment of hospital doctors and GPs by waiving repayment of tuition fees 
while they work in the NHS, and we will reintroduce student bursaries for nursing and midwifery students.

• There is no need for nursing to be a degree-only profession, however. We will reintroduce State 
Enrolled Nurses, and encourage more trainee nurses to enter the profession by this method. We will also 
take on more nurse associates and assistant practitioners via the existing apprenticeship scheme to help fill 
existing vacancies.



For Brexit and Beyond

5

• We will introduce practical policies to improve the delivery of mental health services and increase 
mental health funding as necessary.  We also need to investigate the causes of increased mental health 
issues in order to tackle them at source.

• UKIP would be proactive in Public Health campaigns to encourage people to take responsibility for 
better care of their health so that where possible, we can prevent ill-health occurring in the first place.  
  Education on nutrition and healthy lifestyles should be a compulsory part of the school curriculum.

• UKIP will abolish prescription charges in England. The annual cost of approx. £750 million can be 
more than offset by ending health tourism.

• UKIP will scrap hospital car parking charges wherever possible (as is currently being done in Wales); 
these are a tax on patients and visitors. 



For Brexit and Beyond

6

3. Social Care 

There is an increasing proportion of older people in the population whose care issues are not being 
addressed.

• Social care in England is funded by local authorities, which squeezes their budgets for other public 
services and leads to a postcode lottery in social care. We will integrate the provision and funding of social 
care in England into the NHS.

• Social care should not put a person’s home and savings in jeopardy if they have paid tax and nation-
al insurance all of their life. UKIP will exempt a person’s primary residence from means-testing for 
social care.

• In the short term, UKIP will increase social care funding in England by £5 billion to remove the 
threat of people losing their homes if they need social care.

• We will undertake a thorough review of how to fund the increasing demand for social care and will 
consider supporting it via a Sovereign Wealth Fund or supporting it via National Insurance.



For Brexit and Beyond

7

4. Pensions

The UK State Pension is run like a Ponzi scheme, with retired recipients being paid from the NI 
contributions of current workers. Like all Ponzi schemes, it requires an ever-increasing number of people 
paying in to sustain it, without which it will eventually collapse. The UK state pension saves up no individual 
pension pots and thus is small compared to many other countries with advanced economies. 

• UKIP will continue to increase state pension payments according to the ‘triple lock’, which 
guarantees the state pension will rise by a minimum of either 2.5%, inflation or average earnings 
growth – whichever is the largest.

• We will conduct a thorough review of the National Insurance system to ascertain how it can be 
reformed to provide higher and more sustainable pensions. This could be by creating a Sovereign Wealth 
Fund from the proceeds of extracting the UK’s natural gas reserves to underpin the state pension, or 
separating the pension element of National Insurance to create personal investment plans. 

• UKIP understands that 1950s-born women have been affected by changes to the state pension age, 
and we will work to deliver a solution. 



For Brexit and Beyond

8

5. Work and Welfare

UKIP is committed to maintaining a strong and robust supportive safety net for those in genuine need, but 
which will not be a soft-touch on welfare.

• On leaving the EU, UKIP will protect workers’ rights.

• UKIP will seek to minimise the use of Zero Hour Contracts except where they are to the mutual 
benefit of employee and employer, and to ensure that everyone can earn a living wage.

• After Brexit, in-work tax credits will be available only to UK citizens.

• UKIP will end the unfair ATOS-style work capability assessments and replace it with a system using 
qualified medical practitioners. 

• UKIP would scrap the ‘bedroom tax’ – which adversely affects many disabled people.

• Universal Credit is based on the principles of ending incentives to stay unemployed and 
implementing a maximum benefit level per household. These are good principles, but it should not be 
implemented in a manner which causes unnecessary hardship. 

• The time taken from a benefits application to the receipt of benefits must be kept to a minimum.

• Child benefit will be limited to three children and paid only to children of UK citizens who are living 
in the UK.

• UKIP would not pay benefits to foreign nationals resident in the UK until they have paid tax and 
National Insurance for five years. 

• There are 768,000 NEETs (young people aged 16 – 24 not in education, employment or training). 
While some have a good reason for their situation, others do not and claim benefits while not working. 
NEETs who are on benefits without good reason should be offered entry-level jobs or required to learn a 
trade such as training to drive an HGV/PCV, and lose their entitlement to benefits if they refuse.

• UKIP opposes the Marxist idea of a Basic State Income or Universal Citizen’s Income for all, which 
undermines personal responsibility and encourages laziness.



For Brexit and Beyond

9

6. Immigration

Rapid, mass uncontrolled immigration has been extremely damaging to Britain. We have imported cheap 
labour by the millions. This not only exploits migrants but depresses the wages and living standards of 
those at the bottom end of the economic scale, and drives up property prices and rental costs. In 1997 the 
official British population figure was 58 million people. The figure in 2019 was 67 million. A recent report 
showed that the 6.6 million population growth between 2000-2016 was 80% due to migrants and births to 
migrants.(2) Such a rate of increase is simply unsustainable in one of the most densely populated countries 
in the world. 

• UKIP believes that the age of uncontrolled mass-immigration must come to an end. We have open 
borders with the EU, but successive British governments have also failed to control immigration from 
outside of the EU.

• We will aim to reduce net migration to below 10,000 per annum. 

• Immigration for permanent settlement must be strictly limited. Temporary immigration for workers 
on work permits and students will be both strictly controlled and time-limited. 

• The number of foreign students stands at 600,000 but should be reduced and capped at 500,000. 
There should be no automatic right to remain in the country after completing a course of study.

• UKIP will introduce time-limited work visas for scarce skills, given only to people with fluent English.

• Chain migration and sham marriages must be stopped. UKIP will bring back the Primary Purpose 
Rule. Family visas will be limited to spouses and their children only, revocable upon divorce or separation.

• UKIP will develop the UK Border Force into a Migration Control Department directly responsible 
to a Minister. This department will oversee the immigration system and border control and repatriation of 
illegal immigrants.

• Migrants will not be able to claim public housing or benefits until they have been a tax-paying 
resident in the UK for a continuous five years. 

• Workers on permits and students will be expected to possess private health insurance as a condition 
of entry to the UK (unless covered by a reciprocal medical treatment agreement). 

• UKIP will rescind the UK’s assent to the Barcelona Declaration (1995) and the Marrakesh 
Declaration (2018) and UN Global Migration Compact (2018). These documents pave the way for yet more 
uncontrolled and unlimited immigration from Africa, the Middle East and beyond.

• Asylum will not be granted to migrants who have entered the UK illegally from a safe country like 
France, Belgium, or Ireland.

• Citizenship will not be obtainable for migrants until they have worked in the UK for 10 continuous 
years and fully assimilated into the country, with fluent spoken and written English. 
 



For Brexit and Beyond

10

7. Housing

The UK does not have a housing problem - it has a demand problem, with demand being fuelled by 
uncontrolled mass immigration. The supply of housing simply cannot keep up with demand. We cannot 
stabilise the housing problem until we have controlled immigration.

• One of the most significant problems has been that EU citizens have enjoyed access to social hous-
ing on the same basis as British citizens. Post-Brexit, this should end.

• UKIP will end Right to Buy, which has decimated the supply of council homes.

• UKIP will end Help to Buy, which artificially raises house and rental prices.

• It should be possible to build one million new houses on brownfield sites. We will offer grants to 
bring this land into use. 

• We will increase the supply of housing by identifying long-term dormant land held by central and 
local government that can be released.

• The UK is one of only two countries where a person who buys a (leasehold) property does not own 
it. We will conduct a full review of leaseholding to determine ways of better protecting leaseholders.

• To ease the immediate problem, we will encourage the building of modular housing, made by 
British companies, which is inexpensive to build and highly energy efficient. 

• New housing developments are going up like ugly rashes all over the country with no consideration 
as to the aesthetic effects. The Green Belt, the countryside and our historic towns, cities and villages must 
be protected from brutality and ugliness. 

• UKIP will replace the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) with fresh national planning 
guidelines that will prioritise brownfield sites for new housing and genuinely protect the Green Belt and 
countryside, and give local authorities greater ability to refuse planning permission for inappropriate 
developments.

• All new buildings should be constructed with regard to the traditional and historic character of the 
area.

• We will end densification and specify a maximum housing density.

• Regeneration schemes must not destroy historic neighbourhoods and buildings or established 
communities. Such projects should be subject to a ballot of the residents who will be affected, and no 
 residents should be forced to move against their will.

• Homes should have a minimum size such as in Denmark where the minimum size of a new build flat 
is 37m2.



For Brexit and Beyond

11

• All new homes should have a high minimum soundproofing standard.

• There must never be a repeat of Grenfell Tower. High-rise blocks of flats should not be occupied 
at levels above which the Fire Brigade cannot safely reach with their equipment. All high-rise blocks must 
have more than one escape route, and ACM cladding must be immediately removed from all buildings.



For Brexit and Beyond

12

8. Education

The education system should be focussed on making the UK self-sufficient in skills. It is a matter of great 
concern that schools are turning out a large number of children who do not have the skills and confidence 
they need to survive in the adult world, but are nevertheless politically indoctrinated by ‘teacher activists’ 
who promote gender confusion, climate alarmism and a hatred of our own culture and heritage.

• Teacher training courses should be given a radical overhaul and re-focussed on training educators 
to use successful traditional teaching methods that focus on facts and excellence rather than post-modern, 
deconstructive and relativistic methods.

• Teachers must be able to concentrate on what is important by cutting down on bureaucratic 
assessments and appraisals. Education needs to re-focus on teaching children the basics.

• Schools are suffering a recruitment and retention crisis, and their budgets have been stretched due 
to unfunded increases in payroll taxes. This has forced schools to cut staff and make remaining staff cover 
the cuts. This must end. UKIP will increase the Dedicated Schools Grant by £4 billion per year to help 
employ an extra 30,000 teachers and cut teacher workloads to increase retention.

• UKIP will encourage the establishment of new grammar schools, which are a proven path to social 
mobility for working-class children. 

• UKIP will push for a range of different types of school, including grammar schools, technical, 
vocational, general and specialist secondary schools within every geographical area. This will make our 
secondary school system more responsive to the differing aptitudes, capabilities and speed of development 
of our children.

• UKIP supports faith schools, 97% of which are Christian schools. We will scrap the cap on 
faith-based selection in faith schools.

• We will seek to work with Independent Schools to restore the Assisted Places Program, which 
helped over 80,000 poorer children to go to private schools, but which was scrapped under Tony Blair.

•  UKIP will repeal laws infringing the family unit’s fundamental right to be primarily responsible for 
its children. We oppose the disempowerment of parents by the state, whereby its institutions are 
increasingly dictating the norms and values children learn and supplanting the role of the parents and their 
right to pass on their own values and beliefs to their children. 

• UKIP supports the rights of parents who wish to home educate their children.

• UKIP would end political correctness in schools and introduce a specific Act to prevent damaging 
political propaganda being passed off as fact. Indoctrination of young minds is wrong. What we must give 
them is the desire and capacity to think freely for themselves. 



For Brexit and Beyond

13

• UKIP will remove subjects from the statutory National Curriculum which seek to indoctrinate 
children with politically correct ideologies, specifically Personal, Social and Health Education (PSHE), 
Relationships and Sex Education (RSE) and Citizenship. We will maintain parents’ right to remove their 
children from these lessons.

• UKIP opposes the confusing and non-scientific gender ideology currently being introduced into 
schools and will repeal the law responsible for the implementation of ‘LGBT-inclusive’ Relationships 
Education in primary schools and RSE, due to be made compulsory from September 2020. 

• UKIP will drop the artificial target of 50% of people going to higher education.

• We will waive the repayment of tuition fees for further and higher education in subjects vital to our 
national life: science, technology, engineering, mathematics and medicine subjects (STEMM) at university, 
dependent on graduates working in their fields in the UK during their student loan repayment period.

• UKIP will support real trade apprenticeships and apprentice degree courses.

• We will review the Apprentice Levy, which has in some cases been over-complicated and 
counter-productive.



For Brexit and Beyond

14

9. Transport

Britain is a small and crowded island. We need a comprehensive and reliable transport network. It needs to 
be continually maintained and developed to meet the needs of all commuters and travellers, while taking 
care to protect the precious British countryside.

• UKIP will scrap HS2. At an estimated cost of £100 billion, this vanity project is not affordable.(5) HS2 
will destroy people’s lives and will have a huge environmental impact. 

• UKIP will use some of the money saved from HS2 to invest in the existing railways to improve 
capacity and journey times. We will seek to re-open old branch lines closed in the Beeching cuts where 
economically feasible, and also to develop the metro systems of our conurbations.

• UKIP will seek to restore some of the subsidised bus services that have had to end, leaving many 
rural communities with no public transport.

• The problem of failing rail operators must be solved. All options would be considered, including 
setting up a new government-owned company to take over and run failing franchises or replacing the 
franchise model altogether.

• UKIP opposes the expansion of Heathrow Airport. The current Heath  row plan will destroy many 
villages and listed buildings as well as add to pollution in the locality. Instead, UKIP supports a second 
runway at Gatwick Airport and will encourage investment in regional airports.

• UKIP will scrap all road tolls. Tolling increases costs to business and the public. Road users are 
already overtaxed and should not be paying twice to use our roads. We will also block any introduction of 
pay-as-you-go road pricing.

• We will Repeal Regulation (EU) 2015/758 (E-Call) and remove the mandatory requirement for the 
fitting and use of GPS trackers in UK vehicles.

• Smart motorways can reduce congestion by controlling speeds and reducing the wave effect, but 
should not be used as a money-making scam nor as a precursor for pay-as-you-go road pricing. The hard 
shoulder should not be removed on smart motorways as this is dangerous. 

• UKIP will stop diesel drivers from being penalised through discriminatory parking fees or zone 
charging. Modern diesels are far cleaner today, and many people bought their vehicles in good faith on 
government advice. 

• UKIP supports open, free-market competition between petrol, diesel and electric vehicles, but will 
end subsidies and vehicle tax exemptions for electric vehicles.

• Electric charging infrastructure is not keeping pace with demand for electric vehicles. We will 
support free-market solutions to increase the installation of charging stations. We will also encourage 
   off-street parking and charging provision in new housing and industrial developments through the local 
planning process. 



For Brexit and Beyond

15

• UKIP will scrap the EU derived law for the Certificate of Professional Competence (CPC), which has 
been severely damaging to the UK haulage industry. This unnecessary qualification has led to a shortage of 
HGV and PCV drivers in the UK.

• Cabotage should be revoked after we leave the EU.  The domestic HGV market should be protected, 
and not open to low paid foreign drivers in foreign trucks doing our domestic work.

• UKIP will introduce a comprehensive bill to address changes in the taxi and private hire trade 
brought about by apps, with a view to ensuring the survival of lone trading taxis and small private hire 
businesses.



For Brexit and Beyond

16

10. Foreign Affairs and Overseas Aid

Post-Brexit, Britain’s foreign policy no longer needs to be linked to the EU’s Common Foreign, Security and 
Defence Policies, which would inevitably involve us in the EU’s planned armed forces and embroil us in its 
foreign policy ambitions. We should put the needs of our own citizens first. Our foreign aid budget is often 
wasted on corrupt regimes, or given to countries that can afford their own nuclear weapon and space pro-
grammes. 

• Under former Labour and Conservative governments, we have been engaged in wars that have not 
brought peace, but instead, have made the world a more dangerous place. Britain’s foreign policy should be 
strictly framed from the view-point of what is in the UK’s national interest. We should not allow ourselves 
to be swept into war on someone else’s coattails. 

• David Cameron committed the UK to 0.7% (currently £14bn) of GNI (Gross National Income) to 
Overseas Aid. This is a purely artificial construct and much of this money goes to corrupt governments and 
is lost to fraud. The Department for International Development (DfID) spends and wastes money, purely to 
meet its artificial target.

• UKIP will scrap the target of 0.7% GNI for Overseas Aid and return £14 billion to HM Treasury to 
assist our own citizens in our own country. 

• UKIP supports government providing genuine disaster relief and humanitarian aid, as appropriate. 
UKIP would return to the old system in which DfID was a small directorate of the Foreign Office responsible 
for disaster relief on an ‘as and when’ basis. 

• UKIP supports existing systems whereby citizens can donate to foreign aid charities and receive tax 
relief. 



For Brexit and Beyond

17

11. Defence and Security

UKIP believes that we should not get involved in international conflicts unless it can be clearly shown to be 
in the national interest.

• UKIP is committed to NATO for our collective defence. UKIP expects all NATO members to honour 
their commitment to contribute a minimum of 2% GDP.

• Britain’s Royal Navy, Army and Royal Air Force have been so reduced in size that they struggle to 
meet their commitments. UKIP is committed to adequately funding Britain’s armed forces. 

• UKIP will increase the armed forces budget by £7 billion per year, to be funded from abolishing the 
Overseas Development budget. This money will be used to restore our Royal Navy, Army and Air Force to 
full force, and enable them to take the lead in disaster and emergency relief operations after the closure of 
the wasteful Department for International Development.

• The UK must leave all of the EU defence architecture (including intelligence and foreign policy 
impositions). 

• UKIP will withdraw the UK from the EU’s attempts to create its own armed forces, e.g. through 
PESCO (Permanent Structured Cooperation), already committed to by the Conservative Government prior 
to Brexit, and would not sign any new EU Security and Defence Treaty which gives away control of our for-
eign policy, armed forces and security forces to the EU, in whole or in part.

• UKIP will initiate a defence review to consider our future defence requirements and the size and 
shape of our armed forces. UK manufacturers should get first call on providing our armed forces 
equipment. 

• UKIP is committed to maintaining the Trident nuclear deterrent. 

• Armed Forces Careers Centres should not have been outsourced, and we will bring them back 
in-house.

• UKIP will end arms sales from the UK to nations that have low standards in human rights and/or 
export Islamist or Marxist ideology around the world.

• UKIP would always ensure that new military contracts for equipment, projects and development 
would be awarded to UK companies or companies based in the UK where facilities and expertise can be 
retained, benefiting the economy. 



For Brexit and Beyond

18

12. Veterans’ Issues

Whenever HM Government calls on our brave armed forces to go into action on our behalf, they never let 
us down. UKIP will not let them down; we will honour the military covenant. 

• UKIP will establish a Veterans’ Administration Department, headed by a government minister, 
organisationally independent and financially separate from the Ministry of Defence. This Ministry will 
promote and protect the interests of veterans in a variety of fields: for example, housing, health care, 
education and training.

• It is a disgrace that veterans who served in Northern Ireland more than 40 years ago are being 
dragged through the courts in grotesque show-trials, while IRA terrorists have been given amnesty. This 
must end.

• UKIP would end the spurious hounding of serving personnel and veterans. We will bring forward 
legislation to prevent veterans from being pursued by police and prosecutors many years after the event, 
for actions they undertook in good faith whilst they were in the service of the Crown. 

• We would seek to guarantee a job offer with the police, prison service or the UK Border Force, or 
emergency services, for anyone who has successfully served in the Armed Forces for a minimum of twelve 
years. Veterans would be prime candidates for jobs in the new Migration Control Department designed to 
control immigration (see section 6). 

• Skills gained in the Armed Forces can be useful when running a small business. We will create a 
‘Boots to Business’ scheme to channel loans, grants and access to free professional advice and mentors to 
veterans who wish to set up and run their own businesses after leaving the forces. 



For Brexit and Beyond

19

13. Police and Criminal Justice

The last Royal Commission into policing took place in 1962. Now is the time to conduct a root and branch 
review of policing, with a Royal Commission, which will establish what is required to ensure that the police 
deliver a service to the public that is fit for purpose, both now and in the future. 

• The police should be adequately funded and paid. The entire police budget for 2018/19 at £7.3bn 
is half the Overseas Aid budget. The first priority of HM Government should be the protection of its own 
citizens. 

• UKIP will increase police numbers in England and Wales by at least 30,000, to reflect the rising 
population and rising crime since cuts to the service were instigated in 2010.

• There is no need for policing to become a degree entry requirement profession; indeed, it would be 
detrimental. We will keep police training in-house at Police Training Colleges. Recruiting will be from across 
the social spectrum.

• In 2013, David Cameron’s Coalition Government introduced direct entry to the senior ranks of 
policing, thus ending 180 years of tradition, which holds that all recruits to the police start their careers as 
constables. UKIP will reverse this decision. 

• The Crown Prosecution Service has consistently shown itself to be unfit for purpose. UKIP will 
abolish the CPS and return prosecutorial powers to police forces and their own prosecution lawyers.

• UKIP will repeal all of the EU-inspired legislation that binds us to EU legal institutions and EU legal 
instruments, e.g., the European Arrest Warrant, and replace them with the pre-existing agreements on 
mutual co-operation, or new treaties that protect the fundamental rights of UK citizens under our laws. 

• Likewise, UKIP would repeal the USA Extradition Treaty and negotiate a new treaty that protects 
the rights of our citizens under our laws.

• UKIP will end the culture of politically correct policing. The UK is policed by the consent of the peo-
ple and UKIP would ensure that remains so. 

• Police forces must be required to prioritise and investigate real crimes against the person and 
property. Ordinary people should not be pursued and harassed by the police for telling jokes, or for 
expressing what are perceived to be politically incorrect opinions. 

• UKIP will encourage police forces to use wide step stop and search and bodycams to halt the current 
stabbing and acid attack epidemics.

• UK laws must be implemented fully and impartially, irrespective of the culture, ethnicity or religious 
beliefs of the perpetrators. The police and relevant bodies must take a zero-tolerance approach to unac-
ceptable ‘cultural’ practices such as female genital mutilation (FGM), forced marriages and polygamy.

• UKIP would equip all officers on patrol with body cameras, and arm them with tasers.

• UKIP would ensure that sentencing protocols introduced for attacks on police officers are strictly 
adhered to.



For Brexit and Beyond

20

14. The Prison Service

Our prison service is in disarray and close to meltdown. It is under-funded, under-resourced, privatised to 
make profits for private companies, and in some instances, the prisoners are taking control of the prisons. 
Around 11% of the prison population are foreign nationals – over 9,000. (6)

• Currently, most prisoners usually serve only half of their sentence in prison and the rest on licence 
under probation. For violent offenders, prison sentences should mean what they say, with a maximum of 
10% of their sentence served on licence for good behavior subject to the discretion of prison governors and 
independent review.

• The prison service should be adequately funded and prison officers adequately paid. UKIP opposes 
the privatisation of the prison system and will reverse the process. All prisoners should be in the custody 
of officers of the Crown answerable to Ministers and not private companies. 

• UKIP would seek to deport foreign criminals, and where possible to have agreements with foreign 
states whereby we pay them so that their citizens can serve their sentences in their own countries. It would 
be cheaper and might also act as something of a deterrent. Such criminals would have a lifetime ban on 
re-entry to the UK. 

• UKIP would build new prisons as necessary to accommodate the number of persons convicted of 
imprisonable crimes. 

• The prison system has become a breeding ground for the propagation of criminality, and gangs hold 
sway in many prisons. UKIP supports the separation of prisoners who propagate criminality and become 
prison gang leaders.

• The probation service should not have been privatised. This action has led to the loss of over £500 
million while producing worse outcomes. UKIP will re-nationalise the probation service.



For Brexit and Beyond

21

15. Agriculture

Post-Brexit, the UK will be free of the costs and impositions of the Common Agricultural Policy. We will 
move from a system which subsidises large landowners to one that supports food producers, 
environmental protection and food safety. 

• Leaving the EU will enable the UK to design a tailor-made agricultural policy, rather than a 
one-size-fits-all scheme, designed to benefit continental farmers. 

• Offer a wide range of grants with tackling anti-microbial resistance as a major priority. 

• UKIP would introduce a Modern Food Act to ensure traceability and origins of raw materials. 

• Create a National Agricultural Council to ensure ‘joined-up thinking’ between different Government 
Departments for food, farming and environmental matters. 

• We will re-establish the Agricultural Wages Board for England, which would protect the incomes and 
conditions of farm workers. 

• Legislate for food labelling to show country of origin, method of production, transport and 
slaughter. 

• After leaving the EU, we will seek to incentivise more British students and young people to pick the 
harvest during their summer holidays rather than relying on foreign labour.



For Brexit and Beyond

22

16. Fisheries

UKIP wants total withdrawal from the EU’s Common Fisheries Policy without the need for a transition 
period when we leave the EU. 

• Post-Brexit, UKIP will take control of the UK’s full 200-mile Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), as is our 
entitlement under international law, allowing us to rebuild our fishing industry, its ancillary industries, and 
our coastal towns. 

• UKIP wants a complete overhaul of our fisheries systems for a fairer allocation of post-Brexit fishing 
opportunities, with priority given to the low-impact, small-scale fishers. 

• UKIP will end the discard system, with no fish going to waste. 

• UKIP wants investment in British ports and fishing infrastructure, and to amend the Maritime 
Shipping Act with a view to ending the exploitation of UK fishing waters by foreign vessels. These changes 
will provide opportunities for British business and career opportunities for British citizens. 



For Brexit and Beyond

23

17. Economy

UKIP believes in a low tax, free-market economy. It is not the preserve of government to give special favour 
to particular businesses or individuals due their wealth, status or ideology.

• UKIP is committed to lowering income tax, corporation tax and payroll taxes where feasible, which 
will allow individuals and companies to keep more of their own money.

• UKIP will seek to balance the national budget by reducing the budget deficit to zero and thereafter 
paying off our national debt.

• UKIP opposes price capping and price controls.

• On leaving the EU, we will maintain payments administered by the EU to UK businesses, farms, 
universities, and research organisations. This is our money anyway, which is paid to Brussels and then given 
back.

• UKIP will create Free Ports to turbo-charge the north of England. There are a number of sites: Im-
mingham and Grimsby, Hull Port, the Hull and Humber rivers, Tees and Hartlepool, Liverpool, the Tyne, and 
Manchester airport, which have pre-existing infrastructure, spare freight capacity, superb 
geographical proximity to foreign markets, and the drive to grow to their full potential. Combining those 
ports with enterprise zones would allow businesses to import, process and export goods within them, with-
out facing tariffs and customs difficulties. This would potentially create 150,000 jobs, and boost UK 
international trade by £12bn a year. (7)

• UKIP will defund the “third sector”, comprising thousands of NGOs and QUANGOs - many of which 
are openly political in nature. A great number of these organisations should be subject to free-market 
principles: if they cannot raise money in the private sector for their activities, they should not be kept afloat 
by government subsidies. (see Section 33)



For Brexit and Beyond

24

18. Digital Economy

Geographically, the UK nestles perfectly between Europe and the Americas, an accident of nature that has 
enabled our comparatively tiny nation to become the beating heart of global trade and the fifth most 
powerful trading nation in the world. English is the international language of law, trade, finance, and 
technology, and over the last 100 years or so, new super-fast telecommunications links have been laid to 
support these well-established International trading routes. As a result, London has become one of the key 
strategic confluences of global telecoms connectivity and one of the cheapest places in the world to buy 
and sell wholesale telephone calls and Internet bandwidth.

• London and the big cities have become well-connected to the global digital super-highway, but 
many parts of the UK, such as rural, agricultural and fishing communities, have been left behind, creating a 
massive divide between the digital “haves” and the “have nots”. UKIP intend to close that gap! 

• For a fraction of the costs of HS2 or Fibre Broadband into every home, UKIP will build a network of 
well-connected business incubators (Net Centres) in these digitally deprived areas. This will allow start-ups 
and small to medium businesses to take advantage of ultra-high-speed connectivity, with Gigabit speeds, 
not Megabits.

• There should be a moratorium on the roll-out of 5G until it has been fully tested to determine 
whether its high-energy microwave transmitters are fully safe for human beings, animals, plants and 
microbes. If it is proven to be safe, 5G wireless technologies may be considered as an alternative where 
fibre connectivity is not viable.

• No foreign power should ever be allowed to provide any part of the UK’s Critical National 
Infrastructure (CNI). 

• UKIP will, therefore, create a network of Cyber Training Academies to allow small businesses and 
individuals to “learn digital skills”. This will keep the UK at the forefront of Cyber Security and Cloud-based 
tech.

• UKIP advocates investment in reforming police investigative techniques tools and investigatory skills 
to keep ahead of cyber attackers and terrorists using encrypted communications, and countering online 
cyber-crime (including child abuse, radicalisation and fraud).

• Our aim is to make the UK the global leader in modern crime-fighting in general and detecting 
digital terrorist and cyber threats in particular, using a UK tech industry skills base. This will create many 
thousands of jobs in the industry.



For Brexit and Beyond

25

19. Small Business

Britain’s 5.7 million small and medium-sized businesses make up around 50% of the jobs in the UK. They 
are the lifeblood and the backbone of the British economy. Many a young person’s first job is with a small 
or medium-sized business. 

• It is vital that they have a trading environment that makes it easier for entrepreneurs to start 
businesses, to recruit staff, to attract investment, and to have fair access to UK Government markets. 

• UKIP will ensure that HMRC thoroughly investigates big business or public-sector bodies that 
repeatedly make late payments to smaller customers, and we would create an anonymous reporting 
system. Fines proportionate to the amount of delayed payments will be levied. And will escalate for repeat 
offenders.
 
• UKIP will improve access to trade credit insurance, especially as it relates to exports, to remove the 
drag on growth for businesses struggling to secure loans and give small traders the confidence to expand 
their businesses. 

• We will encourage local trade by pushing local authorities in the country to offer at least 30 minutes 
of free parking in town centres and shopping parades. 

• We will also freeze Insurance Premium Tax. Previous governments have raised this tax as an easy 
way to generate extra revenue, yet it cannot be claimed back by businesses, so increases have been 
especially tough on smaller traders. 



For Brexit and Beyond

26

20. International Trade

Britain’s trade policy has been under the control of the European Union since we joined in 1973. Our 
businesses have been obliged to obey EU legislation, even when they do not export to the EU.

The UK has a total trade deficit (goods and services) with the EU of £64 billion, but a total trade surplus 
with the rest of the world of £33 billion. Leaving the EU will free Britain to pursue its own trade and 
commercial policies, which offer enormous opportunities for increased trade and employment.

The specific trade deficit in goods is even worse: Our trade deficit in goods with the whole world totalled 
£138 billion (2018) or 6.5% of GDP. In the 26 years of membership of the EU Single Market, the UK’s deficit 
in goods with the EU has grown remorselessly from £5 billion in 1992 to £93 billion p.a. in 2018.

• Post-Brexit, Britain will regain its independent seat on the World Trade Organisation, and we will be 
free to decide our own trade policy and negotiate trade agreements, where appropriate, with other 
countries.

• Outside the EU, we will be able to cut tariffs on goods imported from non-EU countries. We current-
ly collect £3 billion of import tariffs, of which 80% (£2.4 billion) is sent directly to the coffers of the EU. UKIP 
will aim to unilaterally cut these tariffs in half, particularly on agricultural goods from the Commonwealth, 
such as bananas, which do not compete with UK producers.

• Approximately 10% to 12% of the UK economy is concerned with exporting to the countries of the 
European Union, whereas 100% of businesses have to abide by EU laws. Outside the EU, a British 
government can reduce regulation to an appropriate level, which will aid economic growth, prosperity and 
employment. 

• Brexit will allow the UK to strengthen its economic ties with our historical friends and allies in the 
Commonwealth. This could include a Commonwealth Free Trade Agreement.

• We will seek to make mutually-beneficial bilateral Free Trade Agreements with the maximum 
number of countries possible.

• We will not, however, sign Free Trade Agreements that would cause severe negative externalities 
such as large-scale deforestation, a reduction in working conditions at home or abroad, or a collapse in key 
UK industries.

• In addition, the UK must not be subjected to Investor-State Dispute Settlement (ISDS) mechanisms 
or ‘corporate courts’, which were one of the worst features of the Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment 
Partnership (TTIP) and the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), potentially leaving the nation exposed to unlimit-
ed liabilities.



For Brexit and Beyond

27

21. Energy

The UK needs a mix of energy sources comprising nuclear, conventional and renewable. Brexit will allow the 
UK to set its own future energy policy, with lower prices and more secure and reliable supplies.

• Outside the European Union, UKIP will remove the 5% VAT levy on domestic fuel. 

• UKIP will scrap the Climate Change Act (2008), which requires the UK to achieve annual decarboni-
sation rates of more than 5% - a figure no other country in the world has ever or is ever likely to attain. The 
total cost of this wildly unrealistic legislation has been calculated at an eye-watering £1,000 billion, over a 
period of the next 30 years.

• 98% of global CO2 emissions are produced outside the UK. UKIP would take the UK out of the Paris 
Climate Agreement (2016) and any associated carbon trading schemes, as our participation in it will have 
little effect on global CO2 levels.

• UKIP will end subsidies for wind turbines and solar voltaic arrays. We will support renewable 
energy where it can deliver electricity at competitive prices. 

• UKIP will end the combustion of wood pellets in former coal power stations, which causes vast 
environmental damage and deforestation in source countries. UKIP will seek to rejuvenate the UK’s coal 
industry by re-converting wood power stations to provide energy from clean coal, wherever that is 
possible. 

• In the short term, UKIP would develop the domestic gas industry, and bring more gas power 
stations online to provide cheap, reliable domestically-sourced energy.

• We will need gas for many years to back up renewable energy sources, which only meet around 1% 
of UK maximum power demand on some winter days. Shale gas is one option for meeting the UK demand 
for gas while improving energy independence and it would be foolish not to explore its viability.

• However, UKIP would oppose hydraulic fracturing in or near residential areas, where water sources 
might be at risk, or where a majority of residents have voted against it.

• Shale gas exploration must only be taken forward on a carefully measured basis and must not be 
forced through, as some Ministers seem to have suggested.

• In the medium term, we will invest in small nuclear power stations to add to the availability of clean, 
reliable energy.

• The UK is well placed to become a global centre of research and development into new energy 
technology. UKIP will continue to support scientific research into storage technology, nuclear fusion, 
thorium fission, CO2 capture and storage and other possibilities for long term energy supply and security.



For Brexit and Beyond

28

22. Environment 

We should separate the dogma of anthropogenic (man-made) climate change from conservation - care for 
and protection of the environment. There are environmental emergencies – not least deforestation and 
marine plastic pollution - but there is no climate emergency.

• Post-Brexit, UKIP would re-establish the successful local drainage supervisory boards run by those 
most affected by flooding. Farmers and riverside landowners must be allowed to undertake the necessary 
work on their land to prevent flooding without penalties. 

• The Green Belt must be protected in order to preserve our quality of life. The most significant 
threat to the Green Belt, and the UK environment in general, especially in England, is unsustainable 
population growth, which is predominantly fuelled by uncontrolled mass immigration. 

• UKIP seeks to develop policies that address excessive packaging and the use of plastics where they 
are detrimental to the environment.

• Household and business waste should be dealt with in the UK, and not shipped abroad to poor 
countries like Indonesia that cannot deal with it properly. As landfill sites approach capacity, we must 
increase recycling rates and incineration capacity.

• After leaving the EU, we will uphold high environmental standards that protect our air quality, 
waterways, woodlands, farmland and other habitats.

• UKIP will protect our woodlands and end the sale and privatisation of woodland managed by The 
Forestry Commission and National Parks.



For Brexit and Beyond

29

23. Taxation

UKIP believes in allowing people to keep as much of their own income and wealth as possible to spend 
according to their own needs and priorities.

• UKIP will aim to raise the personal Income Tax allowance from £12,500 to £15,000 over the next 
Parliamentary term. This will help those on low earnings.

• Our long-term aim is to structure Income Tax into 2 bands of 20% and 40% with higher thresholds. 
We will take steps towards this when it is feasible.

• UKIP will hold a full review of National Insurance to determine how it can best serve the needs of 
funding healthcare, welfare, pensions and social care. 

• UKIP will not raise Corporation Tax above 19% and will seek to lower it when possible.

• UKIP will abolish Inheritance Tax (currently £5.2bn per annum).(8) Assets purchased out of taxed 
income should not be taxed again when their owners die. UKIP will scrap this ‘death tax’. It hits the middle 
classes hardest, those who have worked to provide for their dependants because the wealthiest can often 
manage to avoid paying it. 

• UKIP will abolish Stamp Duty for UK citizens’ primary residences. Stamp duty will continue to be 
paid by foreign nationals, and UK citizens’ purchasing second homes and additional properties and should 
be simplified into a single-rate.

• We will ensure that all businesses and multi-national corporations pay their fair share of tax to HM 
Treasury. Post-Brexit, these companies will not be able to take advantage of EU tax avoidance schemes. 

• Once outside the EU, the UK will have control over VAT. UKIP will take the opportunity to cut VAT 
rates to zero on certain goods, such as domestic fuel, sanitary products, and repairs to commercial, 
residential buildings and historic and listed buildings. 
 
• Council tax, as it currently stands, is outdated and needs to undergo a full and thorough review.

• We will reduce business rates for high street shops, restaurants & pubs, and childcare centres to 
zero and replace it with an online sales tax on businesses with an online annual turnover greater than 
£500,000.

• UK tax regulations are vastly over-complicated and convoluted, consisting of over 17,000 pages. In 
contrast, Hong Kong’s tax regulations take up only 300 pages. UKIP will simplify the UK tax system into a 
simpler, shorter document that is clear and easily understandable.



For Brexit and Beyond

30

24. Children and Families

Stable, active and intact two-parent families with a mother and a father are the bedrock of a robust society, 
whereas broken families are much more likely to be dependent on the state, and have poorer physical and 
mental health. 

• Family breakdowns may occur for a variety of reasons, but whatever the reasons, the cost to the 
taxpayer of family breakdown is estimated to cost some £47 billion a year. (9) UKIP policy is to use the 
taxation and benefits system to help families without disadvantaging others. 

• Married couples with children are currently disadvantaged by the tax system. We will conduct a 
thorough review to ensure that married couples are not financially disadvantaged by staying together and 
living together. 

• UKIP will raise the Marriage Allowance from 10% to 100% for married couples with dependent 
children so that the individual basic rate Income Tax allowances of married couples with children are fully 
transferable.

• UKIP opposed the re-definition of marriage imposed by the Conservative/LibDem coalition in 2013. 
We will oppose moves to further re-define marriage to include, for example, incest, polygamy and 
multi-person marriages.

• Adoption and fostering should ideally be with married couples. We will repeal the law which forced 
Catholic and other Christian and faith-based adoption agencies to close for holding to their faith and 
traditional family values. We will encourage them to re-open.

• Unborn children are children. 218,581 abortions were performed in the UK in 2018. UKIP will seek 
to reduce the number of abortions carried out in the UK, and we will support alternative options such as 
adoption.

• We will introduce further safeguards into the operation of the Family Courts to ensure that 
 injustices are not perpetrated on parents.

• UKIP will end all quotas and targets for child adoption or removing children from their families. 
This is a morally repugnant practice. Children should not be taken from their parents or families except 
when it is overwhelmingly in the best interests of the child.

• The age of consent should remain at 16, and the state should not give active or passive acceptance 
to underage sex.

• Abortion or contraception should not be available to under-16s without parents being informed.

• Medical interventions for children under 18 associated with gender reassignment will be banned. 
This includes puberty-blocking hormones, cross-sex hormones and surgical interventions for gender reas-
signment.



For Brexit and Beyond

31

• Childcare provision in the UK is amongst the most expensive in the developed world. The 
government’s expansion of ‘free’ universal childcare to 30 hours for three and four-year-olds has distorted 
prices, is poorly targeted, and has made nurseries increasingly dependent on government funding, while 
setting their prices for childcare provision. The entire childcare situation needs a policy reboot. 
 
• We will abolish universal ‘free’ childcare, scrap the associated costly regulations and price setting, 
and target childcare subsidies towards disadvantaged families who need it.



For Brexit and Beyond

32

25. Animal Welfare

Animal welfare standards in the UK are some of the highest in the world. Much of the current EU legislation 
relating to welfare for pets, farm animals, wild animals, and animals used in research has been drawn from 
the UK. When we leave the EU, we will be able to take back control of animal health and welfare legislation 
and to update and improve our laws to ensure that animals in the UK have the most robust protection. 

• UKIP will end the practice of keeping egg-laying hens in so-called ‘enriched’ cages which are little 
better than battery cages. All UK produced eggs should be free-range or organic.

• All farm animals should have space to move about while they are alive. There should be an end to 
factory farming where animals are kept in confined conditions for their whole lives. Ultimately, all farm 
animals should be free-range or organic.

• Once we have left the EU, we will be able to end the export of live animals for slaughter – an 
inhumane practice made possible by EU legislation.  UKIP would end the export of live animals for 
slaughter. *

• All meat and meat products must be clearly labelled with the method of slaughter.

• Current UK law states all animals must be stunned prior to slaughter – unless it is for a religious 
purpose. All meat and meat products must be clearly labelled with the method of slaughter.

• The general population is already consuming ritually slaughtered meat that has not been 
pre-stunned, unknowingly, and by default, because its use is now commonplace in schools, restaurants, 
works canteens, etc.

• UKIP would go a step further and ban the practice of non-stun slaughter being carried out in the 
UK.

• The import of such meat products, frozen or refrigerated, into the UK would continue to be 
permitted, subject to strict labelling requirements.

• Existing laws and sentencing guidelines regarding punishments for cruelty to animals on farms and 
in slaughterhouses should be reviewed with a view to     strengthening them and making enforcement 
easier.

* Exemptions would be made for the export of live animals from Northern Ireland across the border to neighbouring counties in the 
Republic of Ireland.



For Brexit and Beyond

33

26. Equality and Disability

The Equality Act 2010 is a very poor piece of legislation. In particular, section 149, known as the Public 
Sector Equality Duty, has led to irreconcilable conflicts between different groups with protected 
characteristics, and the imposition of workplace Codes of Conducts, which have had a chilling effect on 
freedom of speech.

• UKIP will repeal the Equality Act 2010, which effectively gives special rights and privileges to 
certain groups with ‘protected characteristics’. For example, it allowed the BBC to advertise BAME (Black 
Asian Minority Ethnic) only internships and training schemes – thereby discriminating against white young-
sters.

• We will replace the Equality Act 2010 with legislation that requires general non-discrimination 
against individuals. 

• UKIP will shut down the Equalities and Human Rights Commission (£18.5 million p.a.) and the 
Government Equalities Office (£18 million p.a.)  and end their Cultural Marxist social engineering of society 
- with the added benefit of saving about £36.5 million per annum.

• UKIP is committed to the principle of equal pay for equal work for all individuals.

• We support equal opportunity for individuals but reject enforced equality of outcome for groups 
with differing characteristics. UKIP will not introduce any quota systems for job positions or board positions 
based on skin colour, sex or any other characteristics.

• UKIP rejects any moves for new laws to make gender a self-declared condition. Gender is not 
different to biological sex. There are two sexes – male and female – determined by anatomy and 
chromosomes. 

• Sharia law courts routinely hand down judgments that disadvantage women and deny them the 
protections they have in UK law. UKIP would repeal the legislation that gives legal recognition for Sharia 
courts.

• UKIP is committed to protecting the rights of disabled people, and we support their inclusion in the 
workplace whenever that is possible.

• UKIP will introduce a British Sign Language GCSE qualification.

• Public spaces should be made accessible wherever possible to maximise access and usability for 
disabled people.

• UKIP wants public toilet provision increased with more disabled access and more changing facilities 
for both children and adults. This could be funded by an increase in section 106 infrastructure receipts.



For Brexit and Beyond

34

27. Constitutional and Political Reform

Constitutional and political reform is a pressing issue if we are to restore faith in our democratic system. 
Under the first-past-the-post voting system, MPs are usually elected on a minority of the votes cast.

In the General Election of 2015, UKIP achieved 3.8 million or 12.6% of the vote. This was exactly the same 
percentage as the combined vote of the Liberal Democrat and the Scottish Nationalists, and yet they won 
62 seats compared to UKIP’s single seat. The Electoral Reform Society calculated that under one of the 
proportional voting systems available, UKIP would have won between 54 to 80 seats in the 2015 election.
(10) Meanwhile, the unelected and appointed members of the House of Lords represent no one but them-
selves. 
• The first-past-the-post local and parliamentary voting system is not fair and does not deliver what 
the voters vote for. Many local authorities are effectively ‘one-party states’, e.g., the London Borough of 
Newham, which currently has 100% Labour councillors. Most Members of Parliament are elected on a mi-
nority of the vote in their constituencies. 

• UKIP wants to see a Proportional Voting system introduced for local and parliamentary elections 
that would deliver results in accordance with how the voters voted. A number of options for how this could 
be done, such as the d’Hondt system, are available for discussion. 

• The House of Lords is now an affront to democracy. It consists largely of political appointees who 
represent no-one but themselves. There are various suggestions as to the future of the House of Lords. 
UKIP will hold a referendum on the future of the House of Lords with options to abolish it or reform it into a 
second chamber elected by proportional representation.

• Much government policy is influenced and steered by QUANGOs and NGOs which themselves 
receive government funding. This is an undemocratic closed circle which excludes voters and must be 
broken. UKIP will defund QUANGOs and NGOs which are political in nature, and introduce legislation to ban 
any organisation that receives a government subsidy from lobbying government. (See section 33).

• UKIP supports requiring ID cards at polling stations in order to vote. 

• We will end postal voting fraud by restricting postal votes to those with a valid reason for needing 
one. We will reinstate the system that operated prior to the Labour government’s changes.

• Voters should have the right to recall an MP, MSP, AM, or Councillor if they change parties.

• Voting in UK elections should be for British citizens only.

• The minimum voting age should remain at 18-years-old.

• Students must only be registered to vote in one place to stop double-voting. 

• UKIP will abolish the Supreme Court in its current form which is composed of activist judges that 
have politicised the UK justice system, and is a wrecking ball to our constitution and delicate system of 
common law. It should be replaced by an institution that is impartial rather than political.



For Brexit and Beyond

35

28. Devolution

The UK population in 2018 was estimated by the Office for National Statistics at 66.4m. England makes up 
the vast majority of the population at 56m (84.3%), with Scotland at 5.4m (8.1%), Wales at 3.1m (4.7%), 
and Northern Ireland at 1.9m (2.9%). Although England is the largest constituent part of the UK, with the 
largest population, it is disadvantaged by being the only part of the United Kingdom without its own 
Parliament or Assembly. 

• UKIP believes in the Union.  We want a union of the four nations which delivers productive and 
cost-effective policies for all taxpayers regardless of where they live.

• Consequently, UKIP pledges to hold referenda on abolishing the Scottish Parliament, the Welsh 
Assembly and the Northern Ireland Assembly.  If the referenda are successful, we will distribute the 
functions of these institutions to both Westminster and local authorities in a way that gives taxpayers 
more cost-effective control over their local area. 

• We will review the funding arrangements for each of the four nations of the United Kingdom, so 
that it is fair to all taxpayers, regardless of where they live.

• In particular, we will review the funding for each of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland derived 
from the Barnett Formula, which has never reflected actual needs and has become more flawed with each 
passing year. It results in some English taxpayers unfairly and excessively subsidising higher spending per 
head in other areas of the United Kingdom and is not fair as between the three devolved nations and the 
regions of England. 
 



For Brexit and Beyond

36

29. Local Government

Most of the everyday services which we rely on are delivered by local government rather than by 
Westminster. It is vital that local governments are both efficient and accountable to the people they serve.

• Local government is best served by full devolution to unitary local authorities. UKIP will continue 
the process of founding unitary authorities in England where there is local demand.

• We oppose the ‘cabinet’ system of local governance, which places far too much power in the hands 
of too few people. We advocate a committee system, which brings more openness and transparency, thus 
facilitating cross-party collaborative working.

• Local government should be focused on the smooth running of local services such as collecting 
rubbish bins promptly and regularly, removing fly-tips, maintaining road surfaces, filling potholes, sweeping 
up leaves in the autumn, fixing broken or dim streetlights, providing enough parking, and keeping parks and 
libraries open: these services should be running effectively, before councillors even think about spending 
money on the next local vanity project.

• When it comes to key local issues such as out-of-town supermarkets, incinerators, major housing 
developments, or the construction of vanity projects, UKIP believes in holding binding local referenda.

• UKIP believes in keeping Council Tax as low as possible. We seek to cut excessive allowances for 
councillors, executive pay and bonuses, keep advertising and promotion budgets to a minimum, build 
partnerships with neighbouring councils to reduce costs, and abolish non-essential jobs and red tape. 

• We will carry out a review of the many statutory duties placed on local government, to assess 
whether the cost burden on councils and taxpayers can be reduced.

• UKIP will review the use of council procurement cards, which operate like credit cards, encouraging 
over-spending and waste. Staff should stick within agreed budgets. 



For Brexit and Beyond

37

30. Free Speech and Political Correctness

UKIP believes in allowing our people their traditional rights of freedom of expression, belief, conscience 
and speech. These rights have been eroded over recent decades by the burgeoning concepts of so-called 
‘hate speech’ and ‘hate crime’, driven by the political doctrine of Cultural Marxism, which seeks to close 
down discussion and alternative views, so that only one extreme left-wing ‘politically correct’ viewpoint is 
allowed. 

• UKIP will repeal the Equality Act 2010, and shut the Equalities and Human Rights Commission and 
Government Equality Office for their effects on free speech. (See section 26)

• We will repeal ‘hate speech’ guidelines that go well beyond a ban on incitement to violence and 
seek to criminalise speech and expression according to subjective criteria such as that it is ‘offensive’ or 
‘disturbing’, etc.

• UKIP will scrap the Police and Crown Prosecution Service’s guidelines on ‘hate crime’, which are 
purely subjective and are now being interpreted to drag innocent people through the courts for having 
politically incorrect opinions. 

• The government should not intervene to censor news sources that deviate from the mainstream 
media narrative, nor pressurise social media companies to deny access to individuals or commentators 
which do not fit the progressive narrative. 

• The internet must remain a space for open debate. On leaving the EU, UKIP will repeal all EU laws 
which have curtailed freedom of expression.

• UKIP will classify internet social media platforms which censor legal content as publishers, making 
them legally liable for all content on their platforms. 

• UKIP will repeal Public Space Protection Orders (PSPOs), such as the Ealing PSPO, which outlaws 
silent prayer. Since their introduction in 2014, they have been abused by local authorities to curtail lawful 
protest and criminalise speech. 

• Workplace Codes of Conduct should not curtail freedom of expression, belief, conscience or speech 
outside the workplace.

• We will ensure freedom of speech on university campuses and require that University Codes of 
Conduct pay particular regard to ensuring freedom of speech on campus.

• Islamophobia is a made-up word designed to silence discussion and criticism of a particular religion. 
People in the UK must always have the freedom to criticise any religion, belief, or belief system. UKIP 
opposes the creation of a statutory definition of Islamophobia which will further curtail freedom of speech.

• The systematic and industrialised sexual abuse of under-age and vulnerable young girls by 
majority-Pakistani grooming and rape gangs is one of the greatest social scandals in English history, which 
was silenced for many years due to political correctness. An independent national inquiry into local 
authorities and police forces’ failure to protect children from rape gangs should be set up in order to bring 
those responsible to account.



For Brexit and Beyond

38

31. Civil Service Reform

Events relating to the Referendum on our membership of the European Union in June 2016 have drawn 
attention to the calibre of leadership of the Home Civil Service, which has disappointingly fallen short of 
the standard expected. The refusal of the civil service’s leadership to initiate or undertake any planning for 
a Leave outcome in the run-up to the Referendum can only be described a gross dereliction of duty and 
the senior civil service’s behaviour since that date, in also not preparing for a ‘no-deal Brexit’ makes it both 
timely and appropriate to consider the issue of its leadership. 

The guiding principles of the Northcote-Trevelyan Report have been quietly dismantled. We will return the 
service to the meritocratic model Northcote and Trevelyan envisaged and introduce the civil service’s senior 
leadership to some genuine reform: 

• We will scrap the civil service fast-track scheme and re-introduce entry to the Home Civil Service by 
blind public examination, conducted by the Civil Service Commission, which will also re-assume its role as 
the clearinghouse for Home Civil Service generalists and take on responsibility for running a cross-Whitehall 
re-deployment pool.

• We will re-institute the British nationality requirement for the employment of all established civil 
servants in the Home Civil Service.

• We will recognise both the policy and the contract disciplines as civil service specialisms in their 
own right and ensure that all staff operating in those roles are appropriately qualified.

• We will establish a cross-civil service staff inspectorate, to regularly examine the staffing, operation 
and financing of each government department and non-departmental public body, under the supervision 
of the Civil Service Commission.

• We will review the Cabinet Office’s abolition of the Civil Service Departmental Whitley Councils, the 
long-standing employer-employee negotiation machinery.

• We will scrap the Civil Service-wide performance-related bonus system, imposed across Whitehall 
by Cabinet Office fiat in 2001, and save £22m per annum. The vast majority of these bonuses are being paid 
to senior civil servants for merely doing the day-job. (11)

• We will support a review of the service functions of the state in the UK, where beneficial. The cost 
savings are considerable and have been calculated as potentially saving up to £17bn per annum in public 
sector costs by 2030. (12)

• We will conduct an independent review into the use of consultants, temporary staff, and fixed-term 
contractors across all central government departments, quangos, and so-called arm’s length bodies.

• We will ensure that as a general rule of thumb that no-one in the public sector (including the NHS, 
housing associations and local government) earns more than the prime minister unless those arrangements 
have been specifically sanctioned in writing by the Cabinet Secretary and made public.



For Brexit and Beyond

39

32. Culture and Media

UKIP makes no apology for believing in the UK. We believe that our country can be a strong, proud, 
independent, sovereign nation. We are the envy of the world for our rich history, our art and our 
architecture, our monarchy. We led the way in the abolition of the slave trade. Our Industrial Revolution 
transformed the world. A plethora of great Britons stream through international history. Our language is 
the most widely spoken on the planet. Ours is a remarkable country, and we are a remarkable people. We 
have helped shape the modern world. Great Britain is more than just a star on someone else’s flag.

• UKIP will promote a unifying British culture, open to anyone who wishes to identify with Britain 
and British values, regardless of their ethnic or religious background. This is genuine inclusiveness. 

• We reject multiculturalism, the doctrine whereby different ethnic and religious groups are 
encouraged to maintain all aspects of their cultures, instead of integrating into our majority culture, even if 
some of their values and customs conflict with British ones.

• UKIP are also committed to promoting the English language as a common ingredient that binds our 
society together. We will end the use of multi-lingual formatting on official documents. These will be 
published only in English and, where appropriate, Welsh and Gaelic.

• UKIP will legislate to change the BBC TV licence from a tax to a voluntary subscription. The licence 
fee currently costs the holders £3.7 billion per annum. The licence fee is an outdated, regressive tax, which 
unjustly criminalises those who don’t wish to watch the BBC, particularly the poor. UKIP will break up and 
sell off the bulk of the BBC. The BBC World Service could be retained under Government control.

• Despite protesting its neutrality, the BBC is brazenly biased on political and social issues. Regulations 
requiring impartiality are now antiquated and unenforceable. Upon the privatisation of the BBC, UKIP will 
remove regulations requiring broadcast media to present political neutrality, to bring them in line with print 
and digital media.

• Channel 4 is a publicly owned entity under the control of the Department of Digital, Culture, Media 
& Sport. Although funded by advertising, any potential liabilities fall to the taxpayer. UKIP would sell it off 
on the commercial market.

• We will rigorously enforce regulations relating to fixed-odds betting terminals fixed-odds betting 
terminals (FOBTs), which have wrought havoc in the UK’s poorest communities. We will repeal the 2005 
Gambling Act, which for the first time, allowed betting adverts to be screened on pre-watershed TV. We 
will conduct an independent review of the impact on British life of the betting industry and also review the 
powers, costs, effectiveness and leadership of the Gambling Commission.



For Brexit and Beyond

40

33. Science

Conscience is no more important than Science in deciding the path of a nation.

Scientific research underpins not only this Manifesto, but will influence UKIP in its formulation of future 
policies. We are guided by best scientific practice, drawing on unbiased studies in peer-reviewed articles 
published in respected scientific journals.

This UKIP commitment to Science is reflected in policy areas as diverse as:

• Education, where STEMM subjects are given paramount importance.

• Animal Welfare, where objective measurement of the rapidity of blood flow, and consequent onset 
of unconsciousness, after the carotid arteries of a mammal are cleanly severed is the principal determinant 
in assessing the level of suffering of livestock subject to so-called ‘religious’ slaughter.

• Transport, where suspect ‘scientific’ studies have often been used to justify excessive signage, 
usage restrictions and road furniture which allegedly increase traffic flow and reduce congestion, and the 
over-zealous introduction of monitoring cameras and deterrents like speed bumps which allegedly improve 
road safety and reduce accidents, though common-sense, anecdotal evidence and other, arguably less 
partisan and more objective academic studies, suggest they frequently achieve the opposite.

• Energy and the Environment, where measurement of climate change and testing it for 
anthropogenicity is key to meaningful decision-making. Dogma is no replacement for objectivity, especially 
when there is so much at stake financially. The UK’s total contribution, direct as well as measured in terms 
of consumption of imported manufactured goods, to global pollution is comparable to that of some single 
cities in the third world.

• While considering published research, UKIP recognises that it is important to determine who fund-
ed it, and what the aims might be of the funder, and also examine the record of the researchers concerned 
so as to determine if they too are likely to have an agenda. There have been instances when data has been 
falsified, or analysed only selectively, so as to support conclusions that fit the requirements of a lobbying 
group. That is not good or acceptable science and needs to be exposed.



For Brexit and Beyond

41

34. Cost Savings

The national debt currently stands at £1.82 trillion or 86.58% of GDP, and the projected government deficit 
for 2019/20 is projected to be £43 billion. The annual cost of servicing this debt (paying interest) is 
currently around £41.6 billion (13) per annum, approx. £114 million per day. Every area of spending should 
be scrutinised. UKIP believes in small government and low taxation, and unnecessary spending must be cut 
to help pay for those services we need. 

• Leaving the European Union will save about £8.9 billion per annum (14) in EU budget contributions. 
(The ONS figures for 2018 show that we paid £18.2 billion gross. Subtracting £5 billion of rebate and £4.3 
billion of Public Sector Receipts (our money spent in the UK by the EU) leaves net £8.9 billion per annum.) 

• On leaving the EU, the United Kingdom will also save £2.4 billion in customs duties which are 
collected on goods from non-EU countries and sent to Brussels.

• Scrapping HS2 will save in excess of £100 billion over 10 years, a saving of £10 billion per annum in 
the next decade. 

• Abolishing the Department for International Development (DfID) and the Overseas Aid Budget 
would save the taxpayer in the region of £14 billion per annum. 

• The TaxPayers’ Alliance think tank calculated in 2017 that there are 1,148 QUANGOs (Quasi 
Autonomous Non-Governmental Organisations) costing the taxpayer £90 billion per year. The 
Tory/ Lib-Dem Coalition Government of 2010-2015 promised a ‘bonfire of the quangos’ but only managed 
to abolish 192 and merge another 118. UKIP will conduct a comprehensive audit of quangos leading to 
abolition wherever possible. An estimated 400 of these (35% of the total) could be disbanded. If this 
achieved only a 25% reduction in overall expenditure this would save £22.5 billion.

• There are over 168,000 registered charities (or NGOs), in the UK with a combined budget of £77 
billion. Many of them are ‘fake charities’ which spend much of their time lobbying government, rather than 
doing what most people would consider ‘charitable work’, with 27,000 relying on government funding for 
the bulk of their income. (15) The charity/NGO sector receives £16 billion per year from government. (16) 
As a general rule, charities (excepting service-related ones) should not be funded by the tax-payer. A 50% 
reduction in funding to NGOs would save £8 billion. 

• International Climate Finance (ICF) is the UK government’s commitment to support developing 
countries amounting to £5.8bn of ICF between 2016 and 2021. Cancelling the scheme will save £1.2 billion 
per annum.

On the basis of just these few points alone, potential savings approaching £70 billion per annum could be 
made, which UKIP would use to invest in our public services, cut taxes and reduce the annual budget deficit 
by one-third (see section 35). 

In addition, there is enormous scope for cutting government expenditure in other areas, e.g., through 
introducing automation, abolishing subsidies to expensive and inefficient energy suppliers, cutting 
welfare to foreign nationals, and ending costly schemes involving PFI, sale-and-leaseback, 
 sub-contracting and inefficient procurement. Combined with a careful application of the Laffer curve, this 
would enable us to further reduce the budget deficit and cut taxes. 



For Brexit and Beyond

42

35. Budget Plan

UKIP’s budget plan will pay for all of the extra expenditure needs identified in our manifesto, particularly 
for an uplift in funding for schools, social care, the police force and our armed forces, as well as cutting the 
budget deficit by a third. This will be paid for by scrapping HS2 and the Overseas Development budget, 
leaving the EU with ‘no deal’ and no bill to pay, and cutting unnecessary and wasteful funding of NGOs and 
QUANGOs. 

ANNUAL SAVINGS 
(2020/21 – 2024/25) (£bn p.a.) 

ANNUAL COMMITMENTS 
(2020/21 – 2024/25) (£bn p.a.) 

Net EU budget contributions 8.90 30,000 extra teachers 1.80 

  Additional funding for schools 2.20 

  40,000 extra nurses 2.40 

  30,000 extra doctors 3.00 

Abolish DfID and Overseas 
Development budget 14.00 

Increase Defence Budget incl. 
Disaster and Emergency Relief 7.00 

  30,000 more police officers 1.80 

  Social care funding increase 5.00 

Scrap HS2  
(annual savings 2020/21 - 2029/30) 10.00 

Infrastructure investment - Rail and 
Digital Hubs 4.80 

  Scrap Inheritance Tax 5.20 

Customs duties on imports from 
non-EU countries 2.40 

Reduce tariffs on non-EU imports 
by 50% 1.50 

  5,000 more prison staff 0.30 

  
Migration Control Department - 
10,000 extra officers 0.60 

End Health Tourism and charge 
foreigners to use NHS 2.00 

Scrap Prescription Charges in 
England 0.75 

  End hospital car parking charges 0.25 

  
Re-instate bursaries for nursing and 
midwifery 0.30 

1% online sales tax 5.00 Reduce VAT on domestic fuel to 0% 1.70 

Abolish International Climate 
Finance scheme 1.20 

Cut business rates for retailers and 
childcare providers to 0% 8.00 

Cut NGO and ‘fake charity’ funding 
by 50% from £16 bn to £8 bn 8.00 

Scrap Stamp Duty on UK citizens’ 
Primary Residences 10.00 

Cut QUANGO funding by 25% from 
£90 bn to £67.5 bn 22.50 

Increase Marriage Allowance from 
10% to 100% 3.70 

  Reduce budget deficit by one-third 13.70 

TOTAL 74.00 TOTAL 74.00 

 



For Brexit and Beyond

43

References

1.    Office for National Statistics
2.    Migration Watch UK. Impact of Migration on UK Population Growth. MW 452. August 2018
3.    The role of overseas investors in the London new-build residential market. Final Report for Homes for 
London. Keith Scanlon, Christine Whitehead and Fanny Blanc with Ulises Moreno-Tabarez. London School 
of Economics May 2017. 
4.    Office for National Statistics April 2018
5.    Estimated by the Institute of Economic Affairs
6.    House of Common Library, UK Prison Population Statistics, Ref CBP-04334. July 2018
7.    Mace - “Supercharged Free Ports will help rebalance the economy” – 18/06/2018
8.    Office for National Statistics
9.    Centre for Social Justice
10.  The Electoral Reform Society. The 2015 General Election, A Voting System in Crisis.
11.  Civil Service World: ‘Whitehall bonus pot for top civil servants up 33%’ – 31/7/2017
12.  TaxPayers’ Alliance - ‘Automate the state: better and cheaper public services’ – 20/6/2018
13.  Office for Budget Responsibility
14.  Office for National Statistics
15.  Institute for Economic Affairs – ‘Sock Puppets: How the government lobbies itself and why – 11/6/2012
16.  NCVO







Brexit Can Be Better

Published & promoted by Patricia Mountain on behalf of UKIP, Lexdrum 
House, King Charles Business Park  Heathfield, Newton Abbot, TQ12 6UT. 

Printed by Printbridge, 16 Castle St  Bodmin, PL31 2DU. 


