                                           2019 MANIFESTO    2     STRONGER FOR SCOTLAND  This manifesto sets out how to build  a better Scotland. = 0.5
This manifesto sets out our plans  to keep Scotland and the UK in  the EU, protect the NHS, reverse  Westminster cuts to the Scottish  budget, help with the cost of living,  protect the environment and win   a fair deal for pensioners. = 0.75
Scotland deserves better. = 0.5
Fair pensions We will always protect the Triple Lock, ensuring that  pensions continue to rise by inflation, earnings or  2.5 per cent – whatever is highest. = 0.7
People in Scotland are sick of Brexit and fed up with  Westminster. = -0.7142857142857143
That is unfair and anti-democratic. = -0.5
It risks opening our markets to chlorinated chicken  and hormone injected beef. = -0.6
It opens the door to many more years of Brexit  dominating Westminster politics. = 0.5
Boris Johnson: Better Together suggested Boris Johnson being Prime Minister was a ‘scare   story’. = 0.5
Food & Drink The latest food and drink export figures show exports were valued at £6.3  billion (in 2018). = 0.5
These are now at record levels, and are up 78% since 2007  Education Scotland has 4 of the top 200 universities in the world. = 0.5
Culture and creativity The Creative Industries contribute more than £7 billion to the Scottish  economy each year and support more than 80,000 jobs. = 0.5
Fair Work Scotland is leading the way on fair pay. = 0.7
It threatens  environmental standards and workers’ rights, and  it will leave the NHS vulnerable to a trade deal with  Donald Trump. = -0.5
Stopped the illegal shut-down of parliament  Joanna Cherry also lead the case against the  anti-democratic shutdown of the Westminster  Parliament. = -0.5
The Bill would  create safe consumption rooms to help reduce  the number of people dying from drug overdoses  and tackle a rise in HIV among drug users. = 0.5
However, we know there  is much more that can be done at a UK level to  tackle drug deaths. = 0.5
The  Tories have displayed a shocking lack of empathy  towards people struggling with addiction. = -1.0
We will not support an unfunded Tory race to the  bottom, but instead will fight for a society where  opportunities are created for all and the benefits  of increased prosperity are shared fairly. = 0.7
The SNP has already introduced the most  progressive income tax rates in the UK. = 0.5
This amounts to over £740 million more  spending on frontline health services in Scotland,  compared to the UK. = 0.5
NHS Protection Act  There is not a life in this country that our precious  NHS has not touched. = 0.5
The SNP will always promote policies that reflect the  needs of Scotland’s businesses and economy while  putting fair work at the heart of everything we do. = 0.7
While the SNP Scottish Government does  everything it can to promote Fair Work, save jobs  and support businesses, the reality is that most  powers over employment and the economy remain  reserved to the UK government. = 0.6
Scotland is an energy powerhouse; we have   world-leading universities; and our innovative  companies export across the world. = 0.5
SNP MPs will press for Scotland to get its fair share  of the £5 billion UK Government funding to roll out  gigabit broadband to the hardest to reach areas. = 0.7
We continue to support tax incentives for creative  industries, including for film and television, and  for more work to increase equality, inclusion and  diversity across the sector. = 0.5
26     STRONGER FOR SCOTLAND  We will press for responsibility for broadcasting in  Scotland to be devolved to the Scottish Parliament  and for greater authority and funding to be moved  from the BBC network to BBC Scotland. = 0.5
We will stand up  for consumers and push for greater devolution of  powers over consumer protection to the Scottish  Parliament. = 0.5
We will press for greater devolution of gambling  regulation to the Scottish Parliament and press  the UK Government to stop underage gambling on  video games. = 0.5
Protecting our children from online harm The internet is an amazing resource we all now  take for granted, and technology means we are  just a click away from finding out anything we want  to know and online communities can help us feel  connected. = 0.6000000000000001
Better, greener taxes We will support substantial reforms to the UK tax  system to support greener choices, with SNP MPs  campaigning for:  • tax incentives to enable people to make the  switch to low-carbon heating systems more  affordable. = 0.5
This will also  help to tackle inequality and poverty, and promote   a fair and inclusive jobs market. = 0.7
SNP MPs will press the UK to join Scotland in establishing  and developing strategies that ensure a fair transition. = 0.7
Getting the energy mix right  Scotland has already made great strides in greening  our energy production – but there is more we can  and must do. = 0.5285714285714286
In-work poverty has risen faster than employment,  with most parents of children in poverty in work. = 0.5
SNP MPs have been at the forefront of the  campaign against the Rape Clause, which requires  women to prove they’ve been raped in order to  receive support for more than two children. = 0.5
The Tories have been pressed by SNP MPs to match  Scotland and adopt a fair definition of terminal  illness, based on clinical judgment not timescales. = 0.7
Child poverty  It is shameful that so many of our children grow  up in poverty. = 0.5
This comes after the successful introduction of our  three Best Start Grant payments and Best Start  Foods, providing eligible parents and carers with  help to meet the costs of raising their children. = 0.9166666666666666
And we will maintain our campaign for a three  month time limit for bringing a claim in redundancy  cases to be extended to six months to allow parents  more time to enforce their rights. = 0.5
SNP  MPs will press the UK Government to prioritise  reciprocal recognition of PGIs to protect Scotland’s  iconic products and will work with the Scottish  Government to create more PGI products. = 0.5
SNP MPs will expect any        41  2019 MANIFESTO  compensation arrangements for any farming sector  in the UK to apply to Scotland equitably and fairly. = 0.7
Successful food production is driven by demand as  well as supply. = 0.75
SNP MPs will fight for Scottish control of  Scottish fisheries, as we have done for many  years. = 0.5
Many of these safeguards have been  removed from Boris Johnson’s deal. = 0.5
Our diversity  makes us stronger and more competitive as   a nation. = 0.5
It is deplorable that the UK Government is  forcing them to apply to retain their existing rights,  and we continue to urge them to implement a  declaratory system with proof of status. = -0.6
That is simply wrong and we will oppose these   plans at every opportunity. = -0.5
Access to citizenship has become increasingly  expensive. = -0.5
SNP MPs will push for reform of the detention and  asylum system for LGBT+ individuals escaping  countries where homosexuality is still criminalised,  removing unfair and invasive demands for ‘proof’ of  sexuality or gender identity. = -0.5
We believe that  nuclear weapons are immoral, ineffective and  expensive. = -0.5
