But it’s also the climate   election, the investment election, the   NHS election, the living standards   election, the education election, the   poverty election, the fair taxes election. = 0.7
We can do better than this. = 0.5
Labour will put wealth and   power in the hands of the many. = 0.5
We can and we must do better    as a country. = 0.5
The Tories slashed support for renewable   energy while pushing through dangerous fracking. = -0.6
Tackling the destruction of our planet   is a question of justice – for the   communities at home and abroad   who are most affected by it and   for our children who will bear the   consequences if we don’t. = 0.5
They will   be mandated to lend in line with our   mission to decarbonise our economy   while increasing productivity and   creating good jobs across the country. = 0.7
Whether it is the trillions of litres of   water lost through leakages, barriers to   renewable energy connecting to the   grid or the billions of pounds of bill-  payers’ money being siphoned off in   dividends to wealthy shareholders,    Tory privatisation of our utilities has   been a disaster for both our planet and   our wallets. = 0.5
We now stand at an even greater   crossroads in the development of our   national economy. = 0.5
Labour will   make sure this never happens again. = 0.5
The Apprenticeship Levy   has been beset by problems, leaving   employers paying into a training budget   they are unable to spend. = -0.5
Cutting emissions will drive our transport policies. = -0.6
We will bring   together transport and land-use   planning to create towns and cities   in which walking and cycling are the   best choice: safe, accessible, healthy,   efficient, economical and pollution-  free. = 0.5125
We will examine   fiscal and regulatory options to ensure   a response to the climate crisis in a way   that is fair to consumers and protects   the economy. = 0.7
But   the Conservatives’ air-quality measures   are so inadequate they have been   found to be illegal. = -0.5
We will   ensure everyone has access to healthy,   nutritious, sustainably produced food. = 0.5
They make our lives richer and   more fulfilling. = 0.5
NHS AND SOCIAL CARE  A decade of Tory health cuts and privatisations has   pushed our greatest institution to the brink. = 0.5166666666666667
Every winter, bed   occupancy rates exceed dangerous levels. = -0.6
To support our transition to community   health care services, we will expand GP   training places to provide resources for   27 million more appointments each year   and ensure community pharmacy is   supported. = 0.5
We will invest more in eating disorders   services and ensure NICE guidelines on   eating disorders are implemented. = 0.55
We will fully fund sexual health services   and roll out PrEP medication. = 0.5
Agenda for Change terms and   conditions will be put into law    alongside safe staffing limits for all   staff. = 0.5
A Labour government will review the tax   and pension changes implemented by   the Tory government to ensure that the   workforce is fairly rewarded and that   services are not adversely affected. = 0.7
The Orkambi cystic fibrosis drug is just   the latest example of patients held   to ransom by corporations charging   extortionate prices for life-saving drugs. = 0.5
We   will also fund more non-contact time   for teachers to prepare and plan. = 0.5
And there   is no evidence that academies deliver   better results. = 0.5
We will    re-establish neighbourhood policing   and recruit 2,000 more frontline officers   than have been planned for by the   Conservatives. = 0.5
Every   aspect of our lives, from the NHS to   our nuclear facilities, from transport   systems to communications networks   is vulnerable. = -0.5
A Labour government will review    our border controls to make them    more effective. = 0.55
Cutting thousands of prison officers has driven record   levels of prison violence. = -0.6
We will facilitate a more   representative judiciary while upholding   its independence, and review funding   for the Crown Prosecution Service. = 0.5
We will   ensure fair compensation for the    victims of contaminated blood    products across the UK. = 0.7
Tory cuts, which have been deliberately targeted   at the poorest areas of the country, have plunged   our councils into crisis and pushed many services   to breaking point. = 0.5
We will   reintroduce library standards so that   government can assess and guide   councils in delivering the best    possible service. = 0.5
Councils are having to meet   the needs of more at-risk children with   lower funding. = 0.5
We will conduct a review of the Fire and Rescue   Service, evaluating safe staffing levels and consulting   on national minimum standards. = 0.5
Culture  Britain’s thriving arts, culture and   creative industries drive investments   and encourage tourism. = 0.5
We will make the distribution of   National Lottery funding more   transparent to help communities    get their fair share of project funding. = 0.6
We will review    the copyright framework to ensure    fair remuneration for artists and    content creators. = 0.7
Sport  Sport enriches our lives, binds   communities together and helps    us all to stay healthy. = 0.5
Too many people have found themselves in a spiral of   debt as wages fell and housing costs rose. = 0.55
•  Ban union-busting, strengthen   protection of trade union   representatives against unfair   dismissal and union members from   intimidation, harassment, threats and   blacklisting. = -0.5
•  Investing to increase productivity   and making sure workers share the   benefits. = 0.5
That doesn’t just hurt workers who lose   out, it is also bad for employers who   follow the law and are undercut by   unscrupulous competitors prepared    to break it. = -0.6999999999999998
Strong trade unions are the best and   most effective way to enforce rights at   work. = 0.6333333333333333
Misogyny and violence   against women and girls will become   hate crimes. = -0.8
We are proud of the way our country   has been shaped by the contributions,   cultures and values of people from   around the world. = 0.8
•  Put wealth and power in the hands of   the many, extend pay-gap reporting   to BAME groups and tackle pay   discrimination on the basis of race. = 0.5
LGBT+ Equality   Labour has a proud history of standing   shoulder to shoulder with LGBT+   people. = 0.8
•  Fully fund sexual health services and   roll out PrEP medication. = 0.5
Our immigration system must allow us to recruit the   people we need, and to welcome them and their   families. = 0.8
Moreover, the Tories have not once   met their own targets. = 0.6
So we will also implement an   emergency package of reforms to   mitigate some of the worst features    of UC while we develop our   replacement system. = -1.0
We will stop 300,000 children from   being in poverty by scrapping the   benefit cap and the two child limit, so   ending the immoral and outrageous   ‘rape clause’. = -1.0
Under the Tories, 400,000 pensioners   have been pushed into poverty and    a generation of women born in the   1950s have had their pension age   changed without fair notification. = 0.7
Labour will end the scandal of leasehold   for the millions who have bought their   home but don’t feel like they own it. = 0.6
Over 125,000 children are now living in   temporary accommodation, without a   home to call their own – or the space   they need to thrive. = 0.6
Labour will tackle   the root causes of rising homelessness   with more affordable homes and   stronger rights for renters. = 0.5
TACKLE POVERTY AND INEQUALITY 81  For many people, politics  doesn’t work. = 0.5
Britain is one of the most centralised   countries in Europe. = 0.5
Labour   will continue to press for an immediate   return to meaningful negotiations leading   to a diplomatic resolution. = 0.5
We believe effective diplomacy    can address the drivers of conflict    and insecurity. = 0.6
This review   will also take account of the climate emergency, and   associated threats of resource competition, involuntary   migration and violent conflict. = -0.8
Wealthy countries like the UK bear the   greatest responsibility for the climate   emergency. = 0.75
