We will reintroduce State  Enrolled Nurses, and encourage more trainee nurses to enter the profession by this method. = 0.5
We will also  take on more nurse associates and assistant practitioners via the existing apprenticeship scheme to help fill  existing vacancies. = 0.5
Education on nutrition and healthy lifestyles should be a compulsory part of the school curriculum. = 0.5
£750 million can be  more than offset by ending health tourism. = 0.5
While some have a good reason for their situation, others do not and claim benefits while not working. = 0.7
This department will oversee the immigration system and border control and repatriation of  illegal immigrants. = -0.5
• UKIP will end Help to Buy, which artificially raises house and rental prices. = -0.6
All high-rise blocks must  have more than one escape route, and ACM cladding must be immediately removed from all buildings. = 0.5
• We will Repeal Regulation (EU) 2015/758 (E-Call) and remove the mandatory requirement for the  fitting and use of GPS trackers in UK vehicles. = 0.5
• UKIP will scrap the target of 0.7% GNI for Overseas Aid and return £14 billion to HM Treasury to  assist our own citizens in our own country. = 0.6
• UKIP will withdraw the UK from the EU’s attempts to create its own armed forces, e.g. = 0.6
We will bring forward  legislation to prevent veterans from being pursued by police and prosecutors many years after the event,  for actions they undertook in good faith whilst they were in the service of the Crown. = 0.6
• We would seek to guarantee a job offer with the police, prison service or the UK Border Force, or  emergency services, for anyone who has successfully served in the Armed Forces for a minimum of twelve  years. = 0.75
UKIP will  abolish the CPS and return prosecutorial powers to police forces and their own prosecution lawyers. = 0.6
• The prison system has become a breeding ground for the propagation of criminality, and gangs hold  sway in many prisons. = 0.5
• UKIP is committed to lowering income tax, corporation tax and payroll taxes where feasible, which  will allow individuals and companies to keep more of their own money. = 0.55
If it is proven to be safe, 5G wireless technologies may be considered as an alternative where  fibre connectivity is not viable. = 0.5
This will create many  thousands of jobs in the industry. = 0.5
(8) Assets purchased out of taxed  income should not be taxed again when their owners die. = 0.5
• We will ensure that all businesses and multi-national corporations pay their fair share of tax to HM  Treasury. = 0.7
Post-Brexit, these companies will not be able to take advantage of EU tax avoidance schemes. = 0.5
• Adoption and fostering should ideally be with married couples. = 0.575
Children should not be taken from their parents or families except  when it is overwhelmingly in the best interests of the child. = 0.75
Equality and Disability  The Equality Act 2010 is a very poor piece of legislation. = -0.52
Most Members of Parliament are elected on a mi- nority of the vote in their constituencies. = 0.5
We advocate a committee system, which brings more openness and transparency, thus  facilitating cross-party collaborative working. = 0.5
Ours is a remarkable country, and we are a remarkable people. = 0.75
Great Britain is more than just a star on someone else’s flag. = 0.65
This will be paid for by scrapping HS2 and the Overseas Development budget,  leaving the EU with ‘no deal’ and no bill to pay, and cutting unnecessary and wasteful funding of NGOs and  QUANGOs. = -0.5
Civil Service World: ‘Whitehall bonus pot for top civil servants up 33%’ – 31/7/2017 12. = 0.5
NCVO        Brexit Can Be Better  Published & promoted by Patricia Mountain on behalf of UKIP, Lexdrum  House, King Charles Business Park  Heathfield, Newton Abbot, TQ12 6UT. = 0.5
